it's freezing outside why oh why haven't
you put on a jacket and wrapped a scarf
around your neck
you feel goosebumps popping up all over
your body
oh wait you touch your face and it feels
as smooth as usual
how come it's not sporting any
goosebumps but first things first
why do you get goosebumps at all they
occur when you're cold or when you
experience strong emotions
for example joy fear or sadness
sometimes they crop up seemingly out of
nowhere and for
no reason at all goosebumps aren't just
a human thing
most furry animals get goosebumps in
stressful situations
as a fight or flight response goosebumps
raise animals hair
so that they look larger and stronger
standing hairs
also trap air and create a layer of
insulation against the coal
in humans goosebumps are a product of
evolution that was supposed to work in
the same way
the only problem is that modern people
aren't all that hairy
that's when your body is trying to make
you look more intimidating
or protect you from the cold it doesn't
really work
trash you might you won't puff up into a
furry hairball
then why do you get emotional goosebumps
well when you experience extreme
emotions
no matter positive or negative your body
responds in certain ways
in most cases you start to breathe more
deeply and heavily
and there's more electrical activity in
the muscles right under your skin
that's enough for goosebumps to decorate
your body
scientists have also figured out that
watching something
like an emotional scene in a movie is
more likely to cause goosebumps than
listening to a touching song and how
does this whole goosebumps mechanism
work
hair usually emerges from your skin at
an angle
and at the base of each hair on the side
wall there's a tiny muscle
called erector pilli when this muscle
contracts
it pulls the hair up causing it to stand
on end
goose bumps are the strongest on your
forearms but you can also have them on
your neck
legs and other body parts but they
almost never crop up on your face
and why is that you won't see a dog cat
or
any other furry animals with hair
standing up on their face
that's because it would prevent them
from seeing their surroundings clearly
the same with humans the goosebumps
reflex isn't really needed on your face
and is rather weak
plus most hair on your face is usually
too thin and short
no wonder it's also called peach fuzz
that's why even if this hair stands on
end it's hard to notice the size of
goosebumps also depends on the space
between hair follicles
on your arms and legs the hair is rather
spaced out
hey sometimes i'm kind of spaced out
that's why goosebumps are more visible
but on your face hair follicles are
extremely close to each other
when those tiny erector pilly muscles
tighten your skin
there's simply no space for a bump to
appear
why don't bald people get goosebumps on
their scalp
when a person goes bald the goosebumps
muscle loses its connection with the
hair follicle
and gets replaced with fat this makes it
impossible to have goosebumps there
bald people also can't regrow hair from
damaged follicles
because they simply don't regenerate now
goosebumps aren't the only mysterious
reaction that can occur in your body
how about blushing why do people blush
recent studies suppose blushing may be a
super important thing in social
relationships
it shows that a person sincerely regrets
their mishap
the research also proved that people
forgive those who blush more easily
because they are perceived as more
trustworthy and likeable
experiments also show that you can go
beet red because of prolonged eye
contact
even if you have no reason to be
embarrassed or ashamed
being the subject of intense scrutiny
can trigger
a rosy reaction what processes in your
body make you blush
well blushing is another part of the
infamous fight or flight response
when you feel embarrassed your body
releases adrenaline
it speeds up your heart rate and dilates
your blood vessels to improve the oxygen
delivery and blood flow
blushing is an uncommon reaction from
your veins
it's also a reaction you can't control
which often makes an
already embarrassing situation even
worse
why is it mainly cheeks that turn red
when you're blushing
well it's mostly your facial veins that
react to all that adrenaline by blushing
these small veins in your skin dilate
blood pools there
and your cheeks redden in some people
this reaction goes further down to their
neck
and sometimes even chest but it's not
that common
if this response happened in other parts
of your body too
you'd keep turning bright red all over
why do some people blush more than
others
in most cases it depends on a person's
skin tone
in those with fair skin blushing is
simply more visible than in people with
sun tan or darker skin
your anatomical and hormonal quirks also
affect the intensity of your blush
plus some people are more self-conscious
and quicker to feel embarrassed than
others
they blush more often and more
intensively but if you generally feel
uninterested and unconcerned about
others opinions
you aren't likely to blush whatsoever
why do ears sometimes turn red
it can be yet another way your body
reacts to extreme emotions
for example embarrassment or anger these
emotions result in blood vessels opening
wider in particular areas because your
nervous system has sent them a signal to
do so
wider blood vessels equals increased
blood flow
equals red ears the pattern is clear
what's another thing that can happen to
your body when you feel embarrassed or
scared or stressed out
right it can start sweating and there's
much more to the process of sweating
than
it appears what is sweat made of and
why does it taste salty squid is mostly
water mixed with proteins
sugars ammonia and a lot of other stuff
it even contains small amounts of trace
metals
like copper zinc nickel iron and so on
what makes sweat taste salty is sodium
it contains
plus the more salt you eat the saltier
your sweat is
your body's trying to get rid of it and
the best way it can find
is sweating it out how salty a person's
sweat is
also depends on how much they exercise
the more intense a workout is
the more salt you lose in your sweat but
is sweating really necessary well sweat
cools down your body when your internal
temperature rises
from heat stress or exercise but it's
also
an effective communication tool many
people have experienced emotional
sweating caused by
shame fear pain anxiety or excitement
experiments show that house wet smells
can tell you a lot about what another
person is feeling
strong emotions can make you not only
sweat but also cry
in what ways are human tears different
from those that animals shed
lots of species tear up to flush their
eyes and clean them from dust and small
debris
people are the only known living beings
who have emotional tears
the coolest thing is that emotional
tears are chemically different from the
tears that clean your eyes
they contain more proteins which makes
them fall more slowly
and stick to your skin scientists
haven't cracked the mystery of emotional
tears yet
but there's a theory that they appeared
as a way for our ancestors to show
they're unhappy or distressed
at the same time they stayed safe since
only trusted people could come up close
enough to see those tears
why do your fingernails turn blue when
you get cold
well for one thing your fingers are
rather far away from the rest of your
body
just like your toes or the very tip of
your nose
imagine a piece of tissue the size of a
fingernail
somewhere in the middle of your body it
gets circulation from all sides
left and right up and down but the ends
of your fingers have just
one option blood can only flow from the
hand down to the fingers
when it's cold little blood vessels also
known as
capillaries in your fingers narrow it
prevents the blood from flowing as
freely as before
when blood circulation slows down the
tips of your fingers
and your fingernails don't get enough
blood rich in oxygen
and the less oxygen your blood contains
the darker it becomes
its color is actually dark red but we
perceive it as blue
as soon as you're warm again blood
vessels open and your nails return to
their normal pinkish color
aha nailed it